# Balanced Graph Coloring with VNS
Final project for UFRGS' Combinatory Optimization class (INF05010). It solves the balanced graph coloring problem using the variable neighbourhood search metaheuristic.

---


## Metaheuristic: Variable Neighbourhood Search
- **Neighbourhood 1:** Selects a random colour C between the k/PARTITIONS colours with the least total weight. Colours the heaviest vertex from the colour with the most total weight with C.
- **Neighbourhood 2:** Similar to N1, but the vertex is chosen randomly.
- **Neighbourhood 3:** Colours random vertexes from the heaviest colour C with randomly selected non-heaviest colours. That process is repeated until C's weight is less than the second heaviest colour's.
- **Neighbourhood 4:** Randomly selects a colour C between the lightest k-1 colours. Attempts to balance that colour and the heaviest colour by selecting random vertexes from the heaviest colour and colouring those with C, until C has a greater or equal weight to the heaviest colour.
- **Neighbourhood 5:** Solves some of the conflicts generated by the previous neighbourhoods, selecting a random vertex and colouring it with the colour that results in the least amount of conflicts

## Problem: Balanced Graph Coloring
Defined by [RITT, Marcus (2021)](https://www.inf.ufrgs.br/~mrpritt/lib/exe/fetch.php?media=inf05010:t20202.pdf).

- **Instance:** A k-colorable graph G defined by a list of vertices and edges, a list of weights (real numbers) for each vertice and an integer k, representing the number of colours.
- **Solution:** A k-coloring of G.
- **Objective:** Minimize the total weight of the colour with the max weight.

The test files can be downloaded [here](http://www.inf.ufrgs.br/~mrpritt/oc/cmb.zip). 


## Progress
- [x] Solution with solver
- [x] Solution with metaheuristic
